It's been over 2 years since I published part 1 of my aurora guides which is absolutely wild to me. A lot has changed since then. We've had 4 major versions since with another fast on the horizon.    While the older guides aren't awful, I cringe when reading some of the things I wrote back then because I wouldn't do them that way now. So, I may as well rewrite them, right? This isn't particularly a guide; I'm just making plans for a new campaign and I figure I'd write some of my thoughts on fleet design. I think a lot of people feel daunted by fleet design, however it's really not that hard once you get the hang of it and know what you want your fleet to look like. I'm going to design my fleet and show you my thought process as we go, so come along with me for the ride. 
# Questions To Ask Yourself 
Before you open the class design window you should ask yourself a few questions. 
1. What is your doctrine?
2. What kind of ships would you need for that? And, how will those various ships work together to carry out your doctrine?
3. What is your tech level and what can you achieve on your tech level? Does it meet the needs of your fleet?
4. What armament would you want your ships to use?
5. Given point 4, what is an appropriate level of belt armour for the doctrine?
6. Given point 4, potentially the speed of your enemy, and your tech level, what is an appropriate level of speed your ships should be going at? 
And,
7. What are your infrastructural constraints and can you achieve what you want on your current infrastructure? If not, is it that urgent to put out a fleet? OR can you wait a little bit to allow for upgrading your infrastructure? That is to say, shipyards, number of slipways, fighter factories, etc. 
# Question 1 and 2
For many people, when thinking of a new campaign they usually have a vague idea of what they want their doctrine to look like. IN my case, I would like fast capital ships with fighter escorts for point defence. Now as for what ships would be needed, I'd need the capital ship, a Battlecruiser, and a carrier. Perhaps an escort of some kind, nothing too big, a destroyer or a frigate or so. 
# Question 3: The Tech Problem 
This is a very important question to think of. Sometimes, you'd like to design a ship that goes this speed, with that Armor and go so far, but your tech simply doesn't allow it. Doing a critical evaluation of your tech level makes it easier to ground yourself when designing a ship. But, equally as important, you may decide that your tech is so trashy now and doesn't meet your needs, and come to the conclusion that designing a fleet now just isn't worth it. At that point you embark on a research campaign to get the appropriate and needed technology to meet your needs. In this time, you may also work on upgrading your naval infrastructure. When answering this question, in particular, I look at engine tech, weapon tech and fire control tech. The other techs are important but I don't think of those in depth when planning. I know that I'm at Ion Drive Engines, 64 thousand KM range Fire controls, and I have FC Control Tracking 4000KM/s, so with those in mind I can move forward with thinking about the design. 
You might ask well, what's a good tech level to start designing ships, and it depends. For me I'd say Nuclear Gas Core to Ion but preferably Ion is about when you can safely look at laying down ships. NGC engines should comfortably give you a speed of about 3500KM/s to about 5000KM/s, while Ion can get you anywhere from 4500KM/S to 7000. Of course, you'll have to either use very big engines or power boosted ones to get at the higher end of those bands, but I think that's an adequate starting point. Alternatively, if you encounter aliens before then you should start laying down ASAP.
# Question 4: The Big Guns
Sometimes you're constrained with the choice of armament, hence why I put question 3 before this. But assuming you're in peacetime, and you decide that the answer to question 3 is "no", you have the time to research your weapons of choice. Sometimes you may go with the weapon tech that the game threw at you, in my case railguns. Or perhaps you might decide that the weapon the game gave you isn't thematic with your empire and you open a new tech tree. Never the less, remember that different weapons serve different purposes.
Lasers and railguns are dual purpose (Anti-ship, anti-missiles and anti-FAC). The difference is lasers do much higher damage per shot, although Railguns are generally lighter which means you can fit a lot of them on your ships, although they require a metric ton of energy. They also can't be turreted, which could be a disadvantage when tracking missiles or faster FAC's. I like to think of lasers as the most like real world naval guns if that helps. 
Particle beams and their lance cousins are mostly anti-ship. They're expensive, require a lot of power, but they have stupid amounts of penetration power and have consistent pen at various ranges.
Gauss is Mr. Point Defence cannon. Some people do 33% accuracy or even 20% accuracy reduced size gauss then stuff them into quad turrets and then you're able to fit a looooooot of them on your ships. Also, you might be wondering about the reduced accuracy. You can make up for that with bonuses from the ship's Captain, the tactical officer and I think? The admin CO too. There's also a tech line that gives you a bonus to tracking missiles depending on how long search sensors were tracking them. So, it's very easy to make up the difference.
Missiles are.. Special. I'm not even going to bother because there's just so much you can do with them. I'll post some discussions on missiles in the resources later. 
So, with this in mind, generally what you do is have a main gun and some kind of secondary armament, usually point defence and a third set of weaponry. If you have the space for 3 armament batteries, usually what I see people doing for example, is have a big laser turret, then a rapid fire 15cm laser and gauss. Sometimes they might omit gauss and slap on an intermediate calibre in between the main gun and the 15CM. Missile ships usually have some kind of beam weapon. The thinking is you fire a salvo. You cripple an enemy ship, then you leisurely stroll in and finish the job with your lasers or railguns or whatever. No point in wasting valuable and expensive ordnance on a cripple.
# Question 5: The Plot Thickens, or Thins? 
See this is actually something to think about. Slapping the most amount of armour you can get away with isn't always the best idea. Different ship profiles will require different amounts of armour. 
Just as a reference, I've usually seen NPR big gun battleship designs have anywhere from 8 to 12 layers of armour. Cruiser classes are usually 5 to 8, and anything else is usually 3 to 6ish. In another campaign of mine, my battleships have 19, so yep. 
Another variable to consider are shields. Shields are very useful once teched up. From my experience, they're particularly useful against missile attacks, since the launcher recycle rates are slow enough to allow the shields to recover significantly by the time the next salvo comes. You may consider dropping your armour in favour of more shields if you so wish.
# Question 6: Zoom Zoom 
> Sea fighting is pure common sense.  The first of all its necessities is SPEED, so as to be able to fight--When you like, Where you like, and How you like.
Sir Jackie Fisher, apparently.
This statement generally holds true, especially for beam doctrine. Missiles are a different story though. Missiles are usually a hell of a lot faster than most enemy ships, so all you'd need is for your ships to have the slightest bit of speed and then you launch. For ships with turreted weapons -Lasers, looking at you - however, a slight margin of superiority over your enemy is advisable. As Fisher says, speed allows you to dictate the battle. You can close into ranges where you have higher penetration power, with draw if you want and catch them, of course. For non-turreted weapons the same holds true. But like I said. Non-turreted weapons will use the speed of your ship as tracking speed which could be problematic for much faster ships. That is to say if your guns are turreted, they can engage faster ships without a penalty. At least, if you can catch them.
# And Question 7, the Industrial Aspect 
> The Navy's role in maintaining the lifelines of the Empire and ensuring the flow of essential supplies was crucial. Without the industrial capacity to build and maintain our fleets, victory would have been impossible 
Churchill, according to Copilot.
That quote is a very beautiful one, I think. The navy is the lifeline of your Empire; however you can't have a strong and powerful navy if you don't have the industry to build them. Are your shipyards large enough to build the designs you want? Do you have multiple slipways to allow you to put out more than 1 ship per year? And, if you're going for carrier Doctrine, do you have enough fighter factories to keep up with the kind of production fighter doctrine usually calls for? All of these are important questions to ask yourself, and all of these are things you should be progressively working on increasing. 
P.S: I'm not 100 percent sure on this, but larger ships generally build faster than smaller ones. Don't quote me on that though. 
# All right, How Do I, Georgie, Answer the Questions Then?
Note: I wrote this guide a while ago and have since played another campaign. I didn't go very far in that but I figure I'd also include some thoughts from that one as it provides a nice contrast between my original intension of planning a fleet while having no threats, whereas in this one there's a readily apparent threat of whom I have info on. I had just encountered the Raiders and have a few colonies in the immediately surrounding star systems. For clarity sake I'll be referring to that campaign as the raider game.
1. Fast ships with powerful hard-hitting guns with fighters for point defence to minimize smaller, but still relatively resource intensive ships like destroyers and frigates. 
For the raider game, the doctrine I had cooked up relied upon Particle Beams and their consistent damage profiles. The idea was to engage at around 140 - 200 thousand kilometres. Due to the Raiders in that campaign using lasers which have rapid penetration fall off, I could give the raider killers a thin belt. Enough to protect them from 20CM gunfire at 140 thousand kilometres. Of course, they'd need to be faster than the raiders so that I can hold the range to my liking, because that design choice would very quickly fall over if the ships got any closer than 140K. And, in fact, that's exactly what happened in the campaign. I was careless and didn't pay attention to the range. The second they got beyond the 140 thousand KM mark they started penetrating armour left right and centre.
2. A thinly armoured Battlecruiser, perhaps 4 or 5 layers of belt armour, a carrier with the capability to provide long range sensor support to both the battlecruisers and her fighter wing, plus some point defence batteries of her own, and a frigate to stay with the carrier as I don't want it anywhere near active combat. Oh, I almost forgot. The fighters themselves. I'm planning on going for single shot railgun fighters of about 125-150 tons. The fighters should be able to keep up with the fleet, but more importantly they should be much faster so as to allow them to appropriately track enemy missiles. They should also have a pretty decent range, 200 million KM at minimum, I think. 
3. Iirc I gave myself 340 thousand tech points. I have Ion Drive Engines, 20CM railguns, 25CM Plasma Carronades, 40% efficiency engines and 250% boosted engines. The tech needle is around there. Yes, it does meet my needs both from a general pov and from the RP pov of my game.
IN the raider game I was at ion technology also, had researched up to particle beam strength 6, and particle beam range 200 thousand kilometres. Very workable, I thought.
4. Again, RP plays a role in this game. I'd like to eventually pivot towards Particle lances; however, the games gave me railguns and I'm fine with using them on current generation designs and perhaps a few generations after.
Also in the raider campaign, I was keen on using particle beams so I had done a lot of research into them. I figured they'd be a good tool to use here.
5. 4 or 5 layers for the Battlecruisers, 2 for the carriers and perhaps an equal amount for the carrier escort. For the Battlecruisers that should be able to resist its own gunfire while being light enough to not add a significant amount of weight. Though, since the other power has missiles such a thin belt on the Battlecruisers could be vulnerable to sandpaper tactics. AS for the carriers and destroyers they're not meant to be on the frontlines and they have what's the aurora equivalent of splinter protection.
From intelligence and doing some deduction, I figured out that the raiders were armed with a single 20CM laser. I had calculated that at 140 thousand kilometres their guns would be capable of penetrating 3 or so layers of armour. So, I gave my raider killers 4 just for security.
You may be wondering how I figured that out, and it's simple. You can figure out the weapons of your opponents via a few tell-tale signs. Lasers have damage-fall off. If they do more damage the closer you are to them, then it's probably a laser weapon. Railgun armed ships usually have lots of them with relatively low damage. Particle beams have consistent damage at various ranges, so if they do 4 damage at 200 thousand KM and the same at 120 thousand KM, then they're likely particle beams. Lances are similar, but they'll usually have much higher damage. The weakest lance one can field does 12 damage. And well, missiles are missiles. To my knowledge they don't use any other weapon. 
6. 6 thousand or so KM/s fleet wide.
I believe I had settled at around 9 thousand KM/S to outrun the raiders.
7. Again, RP plays a role. I'm simulating a well-established stellar power so my industry is capable of building the designs I'm looking at, although I'll have to ask myself that question for proceeding classes.
The biggest ships I could build were 15 thousand tons, so I had to work within that constraint.
# Good, what's next?
Now that you've answered those questions, it's time to start designing. I like doing a little head napkin calculations though. Nothing much, just think about how much range you want your fleet to have, the fraction of your ships that'll be dedicated to engines, etc. In my case I've settled on a very limited range. My Empire isn't really host to far flung colonial outposts yet, so 4.5 billion KM is quite adequate. I've settled on approximately a third or so of the ship being dedicated to engines. Now that number isn't set in stone as you'll see in a moment, but it's good to have an idea when going into designing. 
For active search sensors, be sure to have a resolution 1 sensor no matter what. This allows you to spot missiles and smaller craft. A 5-thousand-ton sensor is good too, and generally a 15 thousand sensor as well. Although what I do sometimes is have an R1 sensor on all of your ships so they'll always be aware while putting higher resolution and larger sensors on capital ships to provide long range detection. 
AS I knew the tonnage of the raiders, I specifically designed the sensors to have an appropriate resolution to maximise detection of them. Of course, specifically designing for 1 enemy may not be the most optimal in case you encounter other enemies, but you can always build specialised ships for specific purposes like Anti-Raider work in addition to your regular battle fleet.
Beam fire controls are relatively straight forward. There are 2 main types and a more specialized third. The first type is the type your main guns will be using, the second are point defence fire controls and the third are fighter-based fire controls. 
# Main Fire Controls 
These direct your main guns. Generally, you want maximum range (4x), and an appropriate tracking speed that matches your weapon's tracking speed. Let's say you wanted to build HMS Hood. You put 3 triple 35 cm laser turrets on there and gave them a tracking speed of 6500KM/s. You're going to want to make sure that your fire controls can track at 6500KM/s. Fret not about the range because lasers will very quickly exceed the maximum range that your fire controls will be able to track at. The important thing is to make sure, however, you don't put on a fire control that has lower range when you're capable of doing better. You'll handicap yourself. The further your fire controls can track, the better your gunnery will be at different ranges, so do keep that in mind. 
# PD Fire Control Directors 
Point Defence Fire Controls are a bit more nuanced than main gun controls. There's a bit of debate in designing them, but I'll explain the different schools of thinking. 
Universally recognized is that Point Defence armament, and consequently, the fire controls, will need to be able to track missiles which are usually incredibly fast. Therefore, when designing them you're going to want to give it the maximum amount of possible tracking speed (4X). Where the divergence occurs is on range. Because of the way point defence is done (I'll link to it later), some people prefer to restrict the range so as to make the fire controls cheaper and smaller. Making a 4x4 fire control can be very costly and heavy and some people prefer to avoid that. We'll call this school the Minimalist School. That being said, giving the FC the least amount of range you can isn't the most ideal. As I said above, the further the fire control is able to track at, the better accuracy you will have. Putting a fire control that has range of 12000KM may not be the most ideal as the accuracy at 10000 KM, which is where the game assumes your weapons engage at for the purpose of point-blank defensive fire, will be weak. In another campaign, I tried using railguns as point defence and I initially equipped my PD fighters with r12 fire controls, only to find the accuracy at that range was piss poor. Replacing them with R60 fire controls gave me significantly better gunnery against missiles.
Other people (Such as yours truly in some situations) prefer to go for the maximalist School. That is to say design 4X4 Range and 4X4 Tracking Speed fire controls for Point Defence. Why? Because in a pinch you can easily use them as back up fire controls in case your other FC's are down, and, depending on how slow an enemy missile is you have more attempts to shoot them down since your weapons can engage at greater ranges (Providing they have the range to engage at such distances to begin with). That being said though, it depends on the weapon being used and, the profile of the ship and a few factors, as far as I'm concerned. If you're using a very low range weapon like a gauss cannon then it's really not worth it going for maximum range. In fact, depending on tech, you can reduce the size and cost a bit. Next, in another playthrough of mine, on a battleship, the Texas, I armed her with 40CM laser turrets, 15cm's and gauss. As her fire control suite, she has a pair of main gun fire controls and 3 PD Fire Controls. To simplify the design and provide a bit of extra redundancy while maintaining functionality, I opted to go with the Maximalist School. If one of the fire controls for the 15 cm's went down, I could shift around the fire controls without compromising the fleet's war capability. 
Just goes to show another example of how customiseable Aurora is. While there's a META, there's always a META you don't have to treat it as sacrosanct. Your personal preferences, combat experience and roleplay constraints should be your blueprint. 
# I Almost Forgot the Fighters...
See that's ironic because I'm going for fighter doctrine. Fighter Fire Controls is more straight forward I think. The design principles are more or less the same with one caveat: You can drastically cut down on the size of the fire control by setting it to single weapon in the design window. AS the name suggests, single weapon fire controls can only direct a single weapon rather than multiple. Constricts functionality but gives you a much smaller package which can make smaller fighter designs more viable as most if not all fighters are single weapon anyway. Note, sometimes the Minimalist/Maximalist debate might come up here depending on the role of your fighters.
# Back to thinking about your Designs 
The next thing to think of are engines. Engines are very diverse and allows for all kinds of doctrine, so I won't talk too much about them. All you need to know to adequately come up with your own doctrine are that larger engines are more fuel efficient than smaller ones; higher power boost allows you to get more speed but reduces range and bigger engines have the chance to cause your ship to go spectacularly boooooooom! If hit. 
Now, I did say that power boosted engines will use more fuel, however you shouldn't let that hinder you. In some cases, it's necessary to drastically boost your engines to get to the speed you want, and most people will even recommend boosted engines in beam armed ships. You can easily get around this by planning for proper fleet logistics. That is to say build tankers, fuel depots etc. Do note that ordering your fleet to travel at a slower speed doesn't increase efficiency. You use the same amount of fuel for a given distance. 
Reducing your fleet speed does have one advantage though, it lowers your thermal emissions making it slightly harder to track your fleet by passives at further distances. 
Power plants are also very simple. Honestly you theoretically have the same amount of variation as engines but it's really not needed. The design principles are also similar. You can build larger plants which are more efficient ton for ton however, I personally prefer to go for slightly smaller ones that output about 8 to 12 power for redundancy purposes. If all of my guns are powered by a single reactor and it gets taken out then I have no firepower. But if I have several reactors then I'm able to stay in the fight. The weapons will simply take longer to recharge. 
As for everything else, the main considerations are simply going for the best available tech you can and the size most appropriate for the type of ship you plan to build. Remember, if you can't fit everything you want to on a single class of ship you can always design a specialised class. I've seen some people build specialised sensor ships with big ass sensors so that you can build warships without sensors and max out on armour, engines and guns. Because yes. Sensor data is shared across the fleet meaning that only 1 ship needs to have sensors in order for the entire fleet to see and lock onto an enemy ship. That being said, you still need missile fire controls and beam fire controls on every ship in order for them to be able to launch their weapons. Fire controls... Control the weapons on a ship. As for active search sensors, think of it as being analogous to how we as blind folks operate in the real world. While we can't see something a sighted person can transmit that information to us and allow us to get an idea of what, or where a given item is. 
I didn't address the full nitty gritty of the various design variables, you can ask in the thread on the audio games forum and I'll try and explain what I can.
# Some More Design Considerations 
Now that you've designed your tech, it's time to get building. Unfortunately, I've already designed my battlecruiser before I started writing this guide but we'll have the carrier fighter and escort to design.
# A Brief Overview of the Class Design Window 
I understand that the class design screen can be kind of confusing to some, especially since a lot of the elements aren't labelled, so I'll give a quick rundown.
When first entering the class design screen (shortcut key F5), you'll land in a combo box with the name of your empire. This allows you to quickly switch between various empires under your control. It's nothing to be panicked about, it's only necessary if you have multiple powers under your control. 
Tabbing once takes you to a tab switcher. There are various screens in the window that allow you to do various things. I'll explain them in a separate heading.
Tabbing once more takes you to the list view that shows you all of your available components that you can add to your ships. As of Aurora4x 1.3, you can add those components by pressing space.
Tabbing again takes you to the class readout, again, I'll explain what these numbers mean in another heading of its own.
The next few radio buttons allow you to change the amount of a given component you add with a single click. So instead of spamming space to add a bunch of fuel modules to a tanker you can switch it to add more with an individual click.
The next 2 checkboxes, obsolete and prototype will allow you to see components designated as such. 
The combo box after that allows you to designate your class. You have quite a few options, battleships, battlecruisers, cruisers, dreadnoughts, slave transports, etc. You can even add your own designations which we'll come to in a second. 
The next 2 unlabelled edit boxes deal with armour and deployment respectively. Armor is how many layers thick the belt armour of your ship is while deployment refers to how many months your ship can be deployed overseas away from a base without suffering penalties. 
The next few checkboxes will allow your ships to be able to carry out specific functions depending on the checkbox you checked. Strangely, a Collier is a missile transport, a supply ship allows you to transfer maintenance supplies to another ship or a colony, and I'm sure you know what a tanker does. Senior C.O makes it to where the Commanding Officer (CO) of the ship has to be 1 rank higher than a ship with its command-and-control level would otherwise require. 
Conscript means that you won't be pulling from your most experienced crews to man a ship. You should use this on commercial units and survey ships too. 
No Armor means that the ship won't have any armour at all and will basically be a floating shell. This checkbox allows you to make space stations which you can build with industry rather than at shipyards. Note, they have to be commercial units.
Hull numbers means that the ships will be assigned hull numbers based on the US Navy's system. Obsolete here means that the class as a whole will be marked obsolete and you won't see it in the class list view.
 No officer’s means that the ship will not be automatically assigned a CO. Some people use this for commercial ships and fighters.
 The next 2 edit boxes and checkboxes I ignore. 
 The next few buttons are pretty straight forward, I think, so I'll only explain the less obvious ones. Select names allows you to select a name for the class. You'll be presented with a list view thingy. The first list is a list of themes, while the second list is a list of names based on that theme. So, for example there's US States and the second list has California, New York, Texas etc. 
 Lock/unlock class deals with space master mode. While designing your class it'll be unlocked, and consequently it'll give you the option to lock it, whereas when you already set a shipyard to retool to the class or started manufacturing a fighter or space station with industry it'll be locked and show you the option to unlock. Unlocking is only possible in space master mode. This allows you to quickly modify your design. Any changes you make will be automatically applied to all ships of that given class. It's OK to use it if you forgot to add something or made a mistake in design. And launching off from this, copy class allows you to make an exact replica of the ship class. If you feel like unlocking and changing the design is too cheaty you can modify the design that way, or you can make upgrades that way. 
 Don't fully understand what create template does. I think it allows you to be able to transfer class designs from one empire to another.
 Rename comp is short for rename component. It will let you change the name of the focused component. 
 Obso-comp==obsolete component.
 Refresh tech will refresh the available component list. 
New hull allows you to add new designations.
Wide View is a great and beautiful button. It adds a second list view just after the available components list that shows the currently added components on your ship class. It allows you to remove at will so you can adjust and tweak to your liking. 
Skipping ahead a bit, the next list view shows all of your classes. You can focus on the class to edit and look at it. The thing just before it that says unknown will show all the ships of that class once you launch any. 
The next few checkboxes will toggles displaying the given thing. Civilian will let you see civvy ship designs, obsolete class obsolete classes and obsolete comp components. 
And boom. 
# Back to Design 
When designing your ships you have a few things to think about. How much redundancy do you want? I like my ships to have a little redundancy in them for critical components. Namely, fire controls and power plants. Other than that, I don't duplicate much things. There are modules that you can research that help with damage control which can keep damaged or destroyed components operational. The main engineering department also helps with this. 
# Command and Control Modules 
Another thing to think about are the command modules you want to assign to a ship. There are a few, any ship above 1000 tons automatically has a bridge force added to the design. Flag bridges allow you to assign a squadron Flag Officer who makes the fleet react slightly faster and is just cool for RP. Main Engineering allows a ship to assign a Chief Engineering Officer who makes the ship less likely to break down and speeds up damage control efforts. Primary Flight Control allows the assignment of a Commander (Air Group). They speed up any fighter related activity on a ship. They speed up the amount of time it takes a fighter to rearm and refuel. Science Officer speeds up geological and gravitational survey efforts. The Auxiliary Control module lets you assign an Executive Officer to a ship. He doesn't do much usually, but if the CO dies he can take over. And lastly, Combat Information Centre allows the assignment of a Tactical Officer (Tac Officer). He improves the gunnery of the ship, in other words the likely hood that your shots hit the enemy. 
These modules are relatively light and cheap to add, however sometimes, particularly on smaller ships you might come to the conclusion specific modules aren't required. Indeed, why would you add a combat information Centre to a fuel harvester? Or a Primary Flight Control to a Diplomatic Ship? So, think about the role of the ship and how they might benefit from the given module. But the good thing about having more modules on a ship means there are more command posts available which means your officers can train and gain more skills. 
Do note: If you want to build a fighter or FAC, you should definitely remove the bridge. It will save you quite a good chunk of weight. In such small craft every ton counts so it will definitely be a big help.
For the Battlecruiser I gave it an aux control, flag, main engineering and the mandatory Bridge. I just noticed that I forgot to add CIC so I'll do so now. 
But what about the carrier? Let's think about the role it'll serve firstly. The main function of a carrier is to carry, launch, retrieve and resupply parasite craft. A carrier should be nowhere near active combat, but should be able to provide limited defence for herself. Mind you, she should probably be escorted by a fleet so defensive capability shouldn't be thought of as an integral design principle. 
With that in mind, the most obvious module should be the Primary Flight Control. Main Engineering to me at least is a must on any military ship. Aux bridges aren't really necessary but they provide more available posts in the navy so I add them. What about a Flag Bridge? I rather think not. The main benefit of a flag officer is to apply their reaction bonus to the fleet which mostly deals with combat. So, assigning them to the carrier which will be detached from the battle fleet seems counterproductive, although I have done it sometimes. What about Combat Information Centers? I did say that they should be able to give some limited self-defence. That's true, but when I say limited self-defence, I do mean limited self-defence. They're also meant to be escorted by a fleet. Any defensive batteries on the carrier should be the last of the last resort protocols, so I don't think it's necessary. Usually when thinking about assigning specialised modules like CIC or the Science Department, you need a significant amount of the modules benefitting for it to make sense. For example, unless you're doing it for RP reasons, a surveyor with a single geological sensor probably shouldn't be given a science Centre as opposed to one with 5 or 6. 
# What about Maintenance and Deployment?
Maintenance and deployment go hand in hand. I'll detail them shortly but they're important factors to consider and plan for, in particular maintenance life. Before I continue, I should tell you about the difference between commercial ships and military ships.
Commercial ships are those that do not participate in active combat and carry out commercial activities. Some examples of these are tankers, supply ships, fuel harvesters, freighters, space liners etc. Some modules are considered to be commercial, such as fuel harvester modules, cargo bays, passenger transports etc. Those engines that are greater than 25HS or 1250 tons and have the fuel boost set to 50% or less is classified as commercial. In addition, all sensors that are 1HS or 50 tons and smaller are also said to be commercial. 
The benefit of commercial ships is they don't have the same constraints with maintenance as regular ships. They don't suffer maintenance failures and the crew can stay in space indefinitely. You can do a lot with commercial ships. For example, I've seen people design commercial carriers using the commercial module as commerce protection. The game will tell you if the module is commercial or not in the readouts. So, you can go ahead and leave the deployment on commercial ships at 3 months.
Deployment is the length of time that a ship can be away from a colony with maintenance facilities and is sufficiently large enough. I believe it's 10 million. After that point the crew will become unhappy and not perform optimally. The ship will break down more and after a while the ship will literally blow up. So be sure to set your deployment to a reasonable amount of time based on its needs. Capital ships generally have lower deployment since they go to carry out their specific mission then sit around in port. Colonial cruisers longer since they'll be away from port. That being said, leaving the ships in orbit of a planet with enough maintenance modules isn't enough. It'll only prevent the maintenance clock from ticking upwards. So, let's say you continuously sent out a ship over and over. Every time you sent it out into combat the chances of it breaking down drastically increase. This is why we have overhalls. Overhauling the ship will reset the maintenance clock making them ready for combat. 
So, what are maintenance facilities? You can think of these as port facilities. Each facility can support a given amount of tonnage based on your tech and each facility adds their capability to a pool. It's important to be able to support more maintenance tonnage than the actual tonnage of ships there as they'll be maintained less effectively. Here's a quote from Steve, the dev of Aurora.
> If the total tonnage of the ships to be maintained is greater than the Total Maintenance Capacity, each ship will be partially maintained. This is known as the 'Effective Maintenance Rate (EMR)' For example, if the Total Maintenance Capacity is 80,000 tons and the total tonnage of the ships requiring maintenance is 100,000 tons, the EMR is 80%. Each ship will use 80% of the normal amount of MSP required for maintenance. Each's ship maintenance clock will advance at 20% of normal and their chance of system failure will be 20% of normal.
Note, it's possible to slap maintenance modules on a ship which can allow you to build mobile ports if you'd like. Ship based maintenance modules also contribute to the maintenance pool of a planet. 
Maintenance Life is a measure of how long the ship can go before it runs out of Maintenance Supply Points (MSP). You've probably seen something like 
> Maint Life 0.67 Years     MSP 339    AFR 376%    IFR 5.2%    1YR 505    5YR 7,578    Max Repair 300 MSP
All of those numbers are determined by the amount of MSP on a ship. AFR is short for Annual Failure Rate. That's the number of times a module on the ship is likely to break down thus needing repairs. In this case about 3 or 4 modules will suffer a failure. IFR is incremental Failure Rate, or the chance something breaks down every 5 days. 1YR is the amount of MSP the ship will eat up per year, while 5YR is how much it'll use in 5. MSP use increases by the 1YR*years in deployment. For example, in her third year of deployment she'll use 1315 MSP, in the 4TH year 2020, and so on. The 5YR adds up the amount of MSP it'll use in its first year +the second the third fourth and fifth to give a rundown of exactly how much msp, and consequently, resources a given ship uses. 
If you're using beam armed ships, gauss lasers particles etc., there's also a chance that they too suffer maintenance failures and require MSP. So, it's important to always have the MSP be slightly greater than you'd need for the length of deployment. 
Maint Life is impacted by both the amount of MSP on the ship (Maintenance Bays) and the number of engineering facilities, so take note.
# All right, I Promise, We’ll Design Something!
I've been doing a lot of rambling in this but it's time to get to the meat and potaters. As I said I've already designed the battlecruiser so now the only things left for now are the carriers and fighters. I like designing fighters before the carriers. Why? Because from personal experience I usually get a better carrier when I design the carrier around the fighter rather than trying to do it the other way around. The carrier's role is to carry the fighters, so it's only sensible that the carriers be designed afterwards. It prevents waste and yields you a more optimal design. 
When designing missile fighters, I also design the missiles first because the principle is the same. In other words, design from the smallest unit go up. Missile>Fighter>Carrier. 
After creating my fighter class, I usually switch to the wide view, and remove the bridge, engineering bay and fuel storage. This gets the hull down to the lowest possible tonnage. In other words, you're cutting off the unnecessary fat. We can add in stuff like fuel and engineering later. 
# To The Research Screen!
All right; we start off on the active search sensor screen so here's a good place to begin. Like I said earlier the fighters are meant to serve primarily as point defence so it'll need to see incoming missile fire, that is to say a resolution 1 sensor. But, but but... I did also say that the fighters will be moving with the rest of the fleet to provide Anti-Missile fire which means they can rely on the actives of either the carriers or the battlecruisers. That means I can save a couple tons here. That being said though, if these were meant to go off independently, you'd want to give them their own missile sensor. Since missiles are much smaller it means that they're detected much closer meaning even big sensors won't see them beyond a certain point. Something worth considering of course. The sensor doesn't need to be too massive, but not too small either. You can easily get away with a 50-ton sensor.
Going to skip a few to railguns. You might say my way of designing is inefficient, and I suppose it is, but it helps me plan as I go without having to pull up the calculator or Xl. This is a point defence platform, and I'm planning on going for point blank point defence, which means I can happily get away with a 10 CM rail instead of a 12. Saves a bit of tonnage too. Speaking of saving tonnage, I've also gone ahead and set it to be a single shot railgun rather than the standard 4 shot. This makes it significantly smaller and ups the ROF. A 10CM is also more ideal given my current tech since a single shot 12CM fires every 10 seconds, whereas the tenCM fires every 5. This is mine.
Damage Per Shot (1) 1     Rate of Fire 5 seconds     Range Modifier 40,000
Max Range 40,000 km     Railgun Size 0.975 HS  (49 tons)    Railgun HTK 0
Power Requirement 0.75    Recharge Rate 1.00
Cost 3.5    Crew 3
Development Cost 132 RP

Materials Required
Duranium  0.7
Neutronium  2.1
Boronide  0.7]The Readout
As you can see, this is stunningly light weight and has very low power requirements which is why they're a fine choice as point defence weaponry on fighters. You might wonder why not make it a duel or even triple shot. The reason is because it raises the Rate of Fire. Point Defence is about getting the lowest possible ROF so that you can shoot down as many missiles before they get to your ships
Now we're going to design a fire control for the fighter. Since I said I planned on having this fighter serve as point defence fire I've decided to go for the minimalist school. Also helps with saving tonnage. 4X Speed and 0.25X Range, or about 12800KM which is fine for point blank fire. I found that the fire control was actually relatively small, only 20 tons with multi-fire control as opposed to only 10 with single weapon fire controls, but I ultimately decided to go for the SW Control so I could slap more engines and fuel. 
Max Range 12,800 km     Tracking Speed 16,000 km/s   ECCM-1
Size 0.20 HS  (10 tons)    HTK 0
Chance of destruction by electronic damage 100%
Cost 5.61    Crew 1
Single Weapon Only
Development Cost 167 RP

Materials Required
Corbomite  0.51
Uridium  5.1]The Readout
Very tiny. 
Adding one of these should bring us up to about 70 tons or so. At this point I'm thinking the fighter should be about 150 tons or so and 50 of that ought to be dedicated to the engine itself. With that in mind, I did exactly that. I made a 50-ton engine with maximum power boost, in my case 250% and added it to the fighter. The last thing we're going to design is the power plant. I went for the smallest I could get away with, 0.35HS which was about 18 tons. Adding about 4200 litres of fuel and enough maintenance supplies to be able to repair the guns at least twice brought us up to 150, and we're golden. 
Editor's note, I modified the beam fire control because it tracked faster than the ship could travel and I needed the extra space to be able to accommodate the power plant. That's OK, a lot of designing is modifying and tweaking until you get something that works. I usually redesign and delete components multiple times while designing until I get something that works. For example, I was considering upping the fighters to 200 tons and adding bigger engines but I decided against it for thematic reasons.
Eagle class Fighter      150 tons       1 Crew       30.2 BP       TCS 3    TH 31    EM 0
10441 km/s      Armour 1-2       Shields 0-0       HTK 1      Sensors 0/0/0/0      DCR 0-0      PPV 0.98
Maint Life 7.81 Years     MSP 35    AFR 30%    IFR 0.4%    1YR 1    5YR 15    Max Repair 15.625 MSP
Lieutenant Commander    Control Rating 1   
Intended Deployment Time: 1 days    Morale Check Required    

Alabama Reactor Works Ion Drive  EP31.25 (1)    Power 31.2    Fuel Use 1875.00%    Signature 31.25    Explosion 25%
Fuel Capacity 4,200 Litres    Range 0.27 billion km (7 hours at full power)

Adebayo Defence Company 10cm Railgun V40/C1.00/S1 (1)    Range 16,000km     TS: 10,441 km/s     Power 0.75-1.00     RM 40,000 km    ROF 5       
Leonce Computing Beam Fire Control R16-TS10000 (SW) (1)     Max Range: 16,000 km   TS: 10,000 km/s    ECCM-1     38 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Magnetic Mirror Fusion Reactor R1 (1)     Total Power Output 1    Exp 5%

This design is classed as a Fighter for production, combat and planetary interaction
This design is classed as a Fighter for auto-assignment purposes]The Readout
There we go. Perhaps not the most efficient design, but it should work. Hopefully this gives you an idea on what you can come up with.
# A few Notes
I can hear you asking this question already, and the answer is a simple one. 
"But What about the Maintenance?"
Every time the ships fire their guns there's a small chance it breaks down. This is why it's important to be able to repair the guns at least once, or in my case twice. Better safe than sorry. While we're here the range should be fine. That's 270 million KM. I can launch them much closer to the targets and still have a good chunk of range left. The build cost is also absolutely tiny. Even with incredibly low tech and just a few factories I can build quite a few of these annually. 
# Now to The Carriers
Now that we know the size of a single fighter as well as the resources they need, (Fuel and MSP) we can design a competent carrier for them. The biggest shipyard I have can build ships of up to 25 thousand tons, so we're going with that. I'd like a single carrier to carry at least 48 fighters, although if I have to, I'll accept less. I'd like the carriers to be able to launch and retrieve them anywhere from 3 to 5 times, which means they'll need enough MSP and fuel to go out and come back and fully refuel five times, 3 at the least. So, with these characteristics known we can get to designing. 
I've decided to copy the biggest Battlecruiser in my fleet since it's about the same size I want. I just removed the guns and lowered the armour so we can work from there. 
The first thing I did was add a primary flight control. Next, I removed all the weapon-y stuff. The fire controls, the weapons, the power plants stuff like that. I added enough hangar decks and small boat bays to add up to the needed 7200 tons. This brought me up to a little over 20 thousand tons with 4 thousand to play with. I added a little over 600 thousand tons to be able to refuel the fighters 3 times and ditto for MSP. This gave me a ship that was about 21655 tons, which I think should be fine for now. 
Sol - Copy class Battlecruiser      21,655 tons       508 Crew       3,210.9 BP       TCS 433    TH 2,800    EM 0
6465 km/s      Armour 3-69       Shields 0-0       HTK 82      Sensors 0/0/0/0      DCR 12-5      PPV 0
Maint Life 4.81 Years     MSP 6,482    AFR 313%    IFR 4.3%    1YR 462    5YR 6,927    Max Repair 350 MSP
Hangar Deck Capacity 7,200 tons     
Captain    Control Rating 4   BRG   AUX   ENG   PFC   
Intended Deployment Time: 8 months    Flight Crew Berths 144    Morale Check Required    

Matsukara & Steel Mark 2 Capital Ion Drive  EP700.00 (4)    Power 2800    Fuel Use 69.57%    Signature 700    Explosion 14%
Fuel Capacity 855,000 Litres    Range 10.2 billion km (18 days at full power)

League Synaptic and Nural Dynamics Industries Limited Mark 3 Capital Missile Active Search Sensor AS21-R1 (1)     GPS 180     Range 21.4m km    MCR 1.9m km    Resolution 1

Electronic Warfare Jammers:   Sensor 2    Missile 2    

This design is classed as a Military Vessel for maintenance purposes
This design is classed as a Carrier for auto-assignment purposes]The Readout
# Notes
This should be just fine for what we need. It can retrieve and launch fighters and keep them in the fight for a long period of time. Making carriers for beam parasites are generally simpler versus missile parasites since magazines can take up a lot of storage and you might want to put on thicker armour to make sure you don't get an unlucky hit that pens and blows the mags Hood style. 
# A Brief Note on Logistics
Now that we've designed our fleet, I should talk a little bit about logistics. After all, strategy wins battles. Logistics wins wars. When designing your fleet, you may notice that your ships may be able to go, for example, a maximum of 10 billion KM based on your available tech and the speed you want them to go, or perhaps you decided that having far ranged ships is anthetetical to your doctrine. Simultaneously, as you may be aware, the universe is big, especially when you come across those massive binary star systems with billions of KM separating Star A from Star B. You may think this is a problem, and you'd be right. But remember, every problem has a solution and there are a few solutions.
Simply set up fuel depots throughout known space. It doesn't take much to set up a fuel depot in this game thankfully. All you need is a refuelling station and fuel. No population required, but of course, you do need to claim it as a territory of your empire. 
Alternatively, tankers exist. They're essentially ships that carry nothing more than fuel. To build this design you put a couple very fuel-efficient engines and as much fuel as you think necessary for your fleet. It's OK if they're slower than the fleet since they'll be away from the battle anyway. Some people do build fast oilers which do match up to fleet speed, but they can be large and expensive.
There's also the option of a fuel station. They're space stations built with little more than a refuelling hub and ample amounts of fuel. Why might you build this as opposed to simply putting down a fuel depot on a random colony? Several reasons. It isn't uncommon to find a system completely devoid of any kind of body. Be it a comet, asteroid or planet. Perhaps the bodies in the system are inconveniently located billions of KM away from shipping lanes. Thus, this is where the fuel station comes into play.
Note: For tankers and fuel stations, you have to check the tanker checkbox in the design window and add a refuelling system in order to be able to refuel other ships. For fuel stations it may be advantageous to use the refuelling hub module as it's able to refuel multiple ships at once. The downside is that they're large, but that's the advantage of space station. You aren't limited by size. Of course, for tankers that you must allocate shipyard space for, size does matter, and it would be prohibitively large in most cases to add one to a tanker.
I've spoken about fuel, but a fleet runs on more than fuel, you know? Maintenance, missiles, these are things you have to take into account. All of these ships are very similar as far as design and construction goes. For missile ships, you want ample amounts of commercial magazines, an ordnance transfer system and for some peculiar reason, Aurora calls missile ships colliers, so you'll have to check that flag in the design window. Maintenance ships are much the same, but to transfer MSP you'll need a cargo shuttle bay, and unsurprisingly, you have to click the supply ship checkbox.
# So Why Incorporate These Logistical Ships into The Fleet?
Simply, they expand the range of your fleet. They allow your fleets to travel further, fight longer, and repair their systems without having to run away from the battle. They're definitely something you should consider adding to your fleet. Also, you may consider including these ships in your calculations when designing ships. After all, why bother designing your ships to go 20 billion KM when you can design them to travel at 10 billion KM and rely on tankers to make up the difference. Likewise, you may consider allocating less room for missiles and rely on your colliers to rearm the ships. 
The downside to this, of course, is your ships potentially being less capable and able to fight prolonged battles or chase down enemy ships. The British learnt this exact problem during World War 2 with their ships and suffered for it. But of course, these are the trade-offs that comes with building an interstellar fleet.
# Conclusion
Thanks for reading this guide. Feel free to make contributions if you wish if you spotted any errors or corrections that can be made.	
